It is a debate whether a food utensil bought for food but subsequently reappropriated for a non-food purpose requires tevilah e.g. food knife used for cutting paper. A Rov should be consulted.

If one wants to use cups to hold Chanukkah oil before immersing the cups, most poskim rule this would be permitted since it is not a food-use. Pri Eliyahu, volume 3, no. 25, rules that this should not be done.

Utensils that are only occasionally used for food and mostly for other purposes should be immersed without a blessing.

A utensil that was not manufactured for food from the very outset may be occasionally used for food without tevilah. 

Utensils which are used in the initial stages of food preparation – kneading utensils, grinders, shechita knives – should be immersed without a blessing.

A cooking pot requires immersion with a blessing even if the owner's intention is to remove the food from the pot before it becomes edible.

If there is a separation between the food and utensil it is exempt from immersion – tripods or grates that support cooking utensils. Simply wrapping a cloth or piece of paper around food does not exempt the container in which it is placed.

A utensil manufactured from two materials, one of which requires immersion such as metal and the other exempt such as wood, requires immersion only if the non-exempt material comes into direct contact with food, and the utensil is not functional without the non-exempt material.

An exempt material (wood) which is held together with nails on the inside requires immersion if it cannot function without the nails.

An exempt material coated with metal on the inside and outside requires immersion and a blessing. If coated only for decorative purposes, or if coated only on the inside with metal, then immersion should be done without a blessing. If coated only on the outside, immersion is not required. 

Some authorities also exempt large earthenware utensils that are coated with metal on the inside from immersion, since they are very large. One who is stringent should not recite a blessing.

An exempt material coated with glass on the inside and outside should be immersed without a blessing.

A utensil requiring immersion that is coated with an exempt material for functional purposes should be immersed without a blessing. If coated only for decorative purposes, immersion should be done with a blessing.

Coloring a utensil with paint does not change its status regarding tevilah as the paint is considered part of the utensil.

Utensils that are thrown away after use – disposable plates, cups, and the like and utensils manufactured from aluminum foil – do not require immersion. This is because the temporary use of utensils without immersion is only forbidden if the utensil could be used on a regular basis. Utensils that are unfit for long-term use are not considered functional.

Bottles or containers used for storing food or drink require immersion with a blessing providing the food stored in them is unwrapped. If these bottles or containers are not normally brought to the table, a blessing is not recited.

The shape of utensils do not play a role in their status (a spoon versus a knife) as pertaining to the halachos of tevilah.

It is a debate whether a utensil secured to the ground, floor, or wall is exempt from immersion. Some authorities do not require immersion for utensils which are designed to function more effectively when fastened to the ground. A Rov should be consulted. 

Some poskim even exempt metal utensils if their capacity is more than 40 se’ah (331–921 liters or 87.5–243 gallons). One who is stringent should not recite a blessing.

A utensil manufactured in a factory owned by non-Jews requires immersion with a blessing whether the ownership is vested in a public corporation, a private corporation, or a government. It makes no difference whether the workers are Jewish or non-Jewish.

A utensil purchased from a factory owned by a Jew does not require immersion even if the factory’s workforce is composed of non-Jewish hourly workers. If the employees are non-Jewish artisan workers who get paid by piece (pay per unit), immersion without a blessing is required. This is because an artisan gains a share in his product as he works and when the Jew buys out that share, that portion is obligated in immersion. Therefore an artisan that repairs a utensil free of charge or gets paid in advance before he begins working acquires no partial ownership, and immersion would not be required.

A utensil manufactured in a factory which is jointly owned by a Jew and a non-Jew requires immersion with a blessing. By the same token, utensils manufactured in a factory owned by a public or private corporation with both Jewish and non-Jewish shareholders requires immersion with a blessing.

When a utensil is purchased from a Jewish retailer, it should be ascertained whether the manufacturer is Jewish and whether he has a non-Jewish business partner. If it is not possible to identify the manufacturer, immersion is required whether the majority of factories in that country are owned by Jews or by non Jews. The blessing is only recited if the majority of the factories are at least partially owned by non-Jews. If the utensil was imported from Israel where most manufacturers are Jewish and were not purchased by non-Jewish middlemen, immersion is not required.

A utensil commissioned from a non-Jewish artisan, and made from metal supplied by a Jew, requires immersion without a blessing. If part of the metal was supplied by a non-Jew, most authorities require immersion with a blessing. If most of the metal was supplied by a non-Jew, all authorities require immersion with a blessing. 

A utensil that is broken or perforated and no longer usable – for instance, a fruit bowl with a hole in it large enough to prevent it from holding fruit, or a drinking utensil with a hole in it large enough to prevent it from holding a revi’is of liquid – loses its status as a utensil. If it is repaired by a non-Jew with his own metal, immersion with a blessing is required. If the metal is supplied by a Jew, immersion without a blessing is required.

A perforated drinking utensil that is being used for another purpose – for instance, to hold fruit – does not require immersion when it is repaired by a non-Jew, even if it is used again for liquids later (Pri Megadim, cited by the Darchei Teshuva 120:78).

A utensil whose original design included holes does not require immersion if they are filled in by a non-Jew. Since the utensil was not broken, filling the holes is not considered manufacturing.

A utensil coated by a non-Jew with a material requiring immersion – for instance re-silvering – should be immersed without a blessing.

If the handles of cutlery are repaired by a non-Jew, it would seem that it should be immersed without a blessing. A Rov should be consulted.

 A knife sharpened by a non-Jew does not require immersion.

A utensil manufactured by a Jewish artisan for a non-Jew with metal supplied by the non Jew requires immersion with a blessing if the artisan purchases the utensil from the non-Jew after he finishes it. Some authorities argue that a blessing is not recited. If the Jew supplied part of the metal, some authorities require immersion with a blessing, while others exempt it from immersion altogether.

A utensil manufactured by one Jew for another Jew with metal purchased from a non Jew does not require immersion. A utensil purchased from a non-Jew and melted down and refashioned by a Jew does not require immersion. A drinking utensil purchased from a non-Jew and found to have a hole in it large enough to allow liquid to enter and to prevent the utensil from holding a revi’is of liquid does not require immersion if it is repaired by a Jew.

A utensil received as a gift from a non-Jew requires immersion and a blessing.

A utensil that was purchased or received as a gift from a Jew and was manufactured by a non-Jew requires immersion with a blessing (assuming the utensil was not yet immersed).

A utensil purchased on trial does not require immersion until the purchase is finalized.

The immersion requirement of utensils purchased on credit is questionable, since there are those who say that a rabbinic method of acquisition cannot affect a biblical requirement of immersion. That being said, if one bought a glass utensil on credit, for which the obligation of immersion is rabbinic in any event, or if one even bought a metal utensil on credit and brought it home first (this is kinyan chatzer which is a full-fledged biblical acquisition), all  would agree that immersion would be required with a blessing. This is not to be confused with our credit cards nowadays where the seller gets paid right away.

A Jewish utensil sold or gifted to a non-Jew and subsequently repurchased by a Jew requires immersion with a blessing. If the non-Jew bought the item, but never actually took possession over it, this is a debate and a Rov should be consulted. See Shulchan Aruch 120: 11 and the ruling of Atzey HaOlah Hilchos Tevilas Keilim. For this reason, chametz utensils should not be sold to a non-Jew for pesach as immersion might be required when acquiring them back. Instead, one who is concerned that chametz particles might be stuck to his utensils should only sell the chametz particles (not the utensils themselves) or merely rent or lend the utensil to a non-Jew. If this was done for pesach, one can rely on the poskim that deem it exempt from immersion (Oruch Hashulchan, Sho’el U’Meishiv Mahadura Vav No.51, and seemingly the Shulchan Aruch Harav). One who wants to be machmir and immerse such a utensil anyway should not make a blessing (see also Yabia Omer, vol. 6, Yoreh De’ah no. 11).

A utensil given by a Jew to a non-Jew on condition that it be returned requires immersion without a blessing when it is returned. Similarly a utensil given by a non-Jew to a Jew on condition that it be returned should be immersed by the Jew without a blessing before he uses it.

A utensil owned jointly by a Jew and a non-Jew does not require immersion. Consequently, a person exempts himself from the obligation of immersion by taking a non-Jew as a business partner. One should not purposely do this, or advise others to do so, to dodge the mitzvah of tevilas keilim. Furthermore, it would seem that the non-Jewish business partner would need a substantial share of the utensils and also actually makes use of the utensils to exempt the obligation. If the Jew purchases the non-Jew’s share, immersion with a blessing is required.

Utensils which were purchased or captured from non-Jews and are owned by a public authority in the state of Israel – Army, Government, or Local Authority – require immersion with a blessing. Even though there are non-Jewish citizens of the state of Israel, the utensils are considered to have come into Jewish possession.

If a non-Jew renounces ownership of a utensil (hefker), and a Jew takes possession of it with intention to acquire it, immersion is required. If the Jew does not intend to acquire it, the utensil may be used without immersion. Similarly, if a Jew purchases a utensil from a non Jew and renounces ownership prior to immersion, a second Jew who takes possession of it must immerse it. 

One can intend to not acquire an ownerless (hefker) utensil and use it without immersion. That being said, one cannot simply make his utensil ownerless and then use it intending not to reacquire it.

A Jew who borrows or rents a utensil from a non-Jew may use it without immersion. A utensil which belongs to a Jew and is borrowed or rented by a non-Jew does not require immersion when it is returned, since the Jew is still considered the owner of the utensil when it is borrowed or rented from him.

A Jew who borrows or rents utensils that require immersion from another Jew may not use them without immersion. For this reason, eating or drinking directly from utensils that require immersion in someone else's house should be avoided. The food served from or cooked in utensils that require immersion may still be eaten. HaGaon Rav Shlomo Zalman Aurbach offers a rationale to permit a guest to eat from his host’s plates that require immersion, in that this form of use is relatively insignificant, but cautions against forks, spoons, or drinking cups.

Commercial utensils purchased by a Jew for lending or renting may be used by the borrower or renter without immersion. They are considered commercial utensils which do not require immersion. Some authorities only exempt commercial utensils made of glass or coated earthenware. Some authorities even permit the owner of the utensils to use them on a temporary basis without immersion. In light of this, some people are accustomed not to immerse utensils borrowed or rented from Jewish storekeepers even if they undertake to pay the storekeeper the full retail price if the utensils break. For the same reason, some people do not immerse soda or lemonade glass bottles, even if payment is due if they break. Since there is doubt regarding this halacha, one who is stringent should not recite a bracha. There is also a dispute over whether a person may eat or drink in a Jewish-owned restaurant from utensils that have not been immersed. Even in a case where the restaurant immersed them, someone who subsequently buys them should still immerse them, but without a blessing – if they weren’t obligated in the beginning then the first immersion meant nothing, on the other hand they may have been obligated from the beginning and now don’t require immersion, so a blessing should not be recited.

A utensil purchased for food but lent or rented instead requires immersion. This is true even according to those who exempt borrowed or rented utensils from immersion, because the obligation took effect at the time of the purchase. The same ruling applies if the utensil is then sold to another person who intends to lend it out or rent it.

A utensil borrowed or rented from a minor does not require immersion. 

Utensils that were manufactured by Jews and purchased from an apostate Jew or from a Jew who publicly transgresses Shabbos do not require immersion. Some authorities are stringent and do require immersion. One who wishes to act stringently and immerse them should not recite a blessing.

Utensils that were owned by a non-Jew before he converted to Judaism require immersion without a blessing.

Utensils may be kept in the house before immersion, but they may not be used for eating or cooking even on a temporary basis. 

A parent should train their child (chinuch) to refrain from using utensils before immersion. It is forbidden for anyone, parent or stranger, to serve a child or instruct him to eat from a utensil that has not been immersed. A stranger is not obligated to stop a child from using a utensil that has not been immersed. When necessary, food for which one has a special need may be served to a minor from a utensil that cannot be immersed. 

A utensil that was not manufactured to be used for food may be used occasionally for eating without immersion. 

A utensil which is purchased by a Jew, but will only be used by non-Jews, does not require immersion.

If one cooked in a utensil before he immersed it, the food may still be eaten. The food should still be removed from the utensil as soon as possible. There exists a discussion on the proper way to handle food cans and jars. Some rule that once opened the contents should be removed. Others permit even eating directly from the container, returning the contents back into the container, and cooking the food in the container. One can be lenient regarding this matter since most people do not intend to acquire the actual container but rather only its contents, and the cans are disposed of after a single use. Some also say that the Jew’s act of opening the can makes it his (maaseh uman), and therefore would not require immersion. Those who act meticulously have specific intention not to buy the can container, but only its contents.

One may not instruct a non-Jew (or another Jew) to prepare food for him with a utensil lacking immersion.

A utensil that is purchased from a non-Jew and cannot be immersed should be broken and repaired by a Jew. For example, a very large cauldron should be perforated, so it loses the status of a utensil, and then repaired by a Jew.

An electrical appliance that cannot be immersed should be dismantled in such a way that it can no longer be used without repair by an electrician. Once reassembled, it will thus be “manufactured” by Jew (exempting it from immersion). Some say that this method should only be used for electrical appliances. One should consult a Rov about the degree of dismantling that is required.

A utensil which is composed of different parts, like a meat grinder, does not lose the status of utensil when it is dismantled.

Whenever there is a doubt as to whether a utensil has undergone immersion or whether it requires immersion, the utensil should be immersed without a blessing.

If one or more utensils which require immersion become mixed up with utensils that do not require immersion, and one cannot tell the difference between them, all of them should be immersed. The blessing of “Al Tevilas Keilim” (the plural form) should be recited even if only one of the utensils requires immersion, since all the utensils require immersion due to the mix-up. That being said, if immersing all of the utensils would be a great bother or expense, and most of the utensils do not require immersion, one can use all of them (bitul b’rov).

A chatzitzah interposition between the utensil and the water invalidates the immersion. 

Dirt, rust, seals, and black spots caused by fire must be removed. Labels that are not usually removed, for instance, labels on crystal, which enhance the crystal’s value, are considered part of the utensil and need not be removed. Limestone accumulated on the inside of a kettle is not a chatzitzah; since people are not particular about removing it, it becomes part of the utensil.

A utensil that was immersed with a chatzitzah must be immersed a second time after the chatzitzah is removed without a blessing. If the owner became distracted between the first and second immersion a new blessing should be recited. Otherwise the blessing made on the first immersion covers the second immersion as well.

A chatzitzah that is attached to the minority of a utensil, or a chatzitzah that neither the owner nor most other people are particular about removing, does not render the immersion ineffective. Therefore, storekeepers who leave price labels on during immersion, since they prefer the label to stay on for customers to see, need not perform another immersion. That being said, one should initially remove these types of chatzitzos.

A chatzitzah where at certain times a person is particular to remove and certain times is not particular to remove, still needs to be removed. This is true even if the person isn’t currently bothered by it during the immersion.

Handles and other parts attached to a utensil, even those manufactured from materials exempt from immersion, do not have to be removed before the utensil is immersed. If a utensil is immersed with such parts attached, any chatzitzos on them must be removed. Therefore a bottle encased in a wicker basket may be immersed since the basket is not considered a chatzitzah.  Similarly, there is no need to take apart a thermos bottle or other utensils assembled from components.

A part that is attached to a utensil incorrectly is considered a chatzitzah  because it will eventually be removed and reattached properly.

A utensil which needs to be kashered should be kashered before tevilah. Some say that if the order was switched the tevilah should be repeated after kashering without a blessing.

Utensils may be immersed any day or night except Shabbos and Yom Tov. tevilah enables a utensil to be used, which is “repairing” the utensil, so it is forbidden on Shabbos and Yom Tov (there are certain exceptions).

tevilah is permitted during Chol HaMoed.

If a person forgets to immerse a utensil before Shabbos and Yom Tov, he may give it to a non-Jew as a gift. The non-Jew should acquire it through meshichah (drawing the utensil to him) or hagbahah (lifting it up). The Jew may then borrow the utensil back from him and use it without immersion. This suggestion may also be used on a weekday where there is no mikvah available. This method should only be used in pressing circumstances. After Shabbos or Yom Tov, or when a mikvah becomes available, the utensils should be immersed together with other utensils that require tevilah with a blessing. There is a controversy over reciting a blessing if the utensil is immersed by itself. All authorities agree if the Jew legally reacquires the utensil from the non-Jew, it may be immersed with a blessing. It is therefore advisable to ask the non-Jew to return the utensil as a gift. The obligation of tevilah is only lifted if ownership is transferred to a non-Jew. Transfer of ownership to another Jew (even a minor) is ineffective. 

If the tevilah itself was not possible to be performed before a Yom Tov, and the utensil is necessary for the enjoyment of the holiday, tevilah may be carried out with a blessing on Yom Tov itself (but not Shabbos) in the normal manner. The one who does this must do it discretely and not publicise it to anyone.

Someone who transgresses by immersing a utensil on Shabbos or Yom Tov as if they were normal days may use it.

tevilah is prohibited during the twilight before Shabbos or Yom Tov (Bein Hashmashos). Someone who is in doubt as to whether it is twilight should not immerse a utensil. A utensil that is needed for Shabbos or Yom Tov may be immersed with a blessing during the twilight before Shabbos or Yom Tov. tevilah during the twilight that precedes motzo’ei Shabbos or motzo’ei Yom Tov is forbidden since it is not being done for the needs of Shabbos or Yom Tov.

A person who accepts Shabbos or Yom Tov before sunset may not immerse utensils, even if they are needed for Shabbos or Yom Tov. He may, however, ask another Jew who has not accepted Shabbos yet, or a non-Jew, who will be supervised by a Jew, to immerse them.

A person who has not yet made Havdala (in davening, over wine, or with the words baruch ha’mavdil bein ha’kodesh u’vein ha’chol) on motzo’ei Shabbos may ask a Jew who has, to immerse his utensils for him. He may then use them before reciting Havdalah.

Tevilas Keilim must be performed in water which is suitable for Tivelah of a woman who is a niddah. Examples are the sea, ocean, a mikvah, a river, or a large collection of rain water that contains 40 se’ah. Immersion cannot be done in drawn water or even in a large utensil that filled with the necessary amount of water on its own.

Utensils may not be immersed in snow. In pressing circumstances, glassware and coated earthenware may be immersed in snow if 40 se’ah are collected in one place and if each utensil is completely covered, without any airspace separating it from the snow.

Anyone – Jews, non-Jews, minors – may immerse a utensil. An adult Jew must supervise a minor or a non-Jew performing tevilah, as their testimony regarding tevilas keilim is not accepted. Some authorities accept their testimony for glassware and coated earthenware. Even a utensil which falls into a kosher mikvah by accident is considered to have undergone a valid Tevila. It is proper that one has the intention to fulfill the mitzvah of tevilas keilim during its performance.


Utensils that require immersion with a blessing should not be given to a non-Jew to immerse even if a Jewish adult supervises him, since the Jew cannot recite a blessing over tevilah performed by a non-Jew. If the Jew is immersing other utensils, he may recite the blessing over the utensils which he immerses with the intention that it include the utensils being immersed by the non-Jew. Utensils may only be immersed by a minor under adult supervision, but the minor may recite the blessing.

tevilah which was performed without the owner's knowledge is effective. A person who knows that the owner will be pleased to learn that his utensils were immersed may recite the blessing even if he was not designated as an agent.

A Jewish storekeeper who sells utensils manufactured by non-Jews should not immerse them before they are purchased. This is because commercial utensils only become subject to tevilah after they are sold.

A utensil purchased for a gift should not be immersed before it is given to the recipient.

Those who act stringently and immerse nylon and plastic utensils should not recite a blessing.

One who recites the plural form of the blessing when immersing one utensil, or the singular form when immersing multiple utensils has fulfilled the obligation.

One who is uncertain whether he has recited the blessing should not recite it.

One who did not recite the blessing before immersion should not recite it after.

A minor who performs tevilah recites a blessing. 

A person who is in the process of immersing a utensil(s), and after reciting the blessing finds that he needs to immerse another utensil(s), should recite a separate blessing for the other utensil(s) after finishing with the first.

A Jew who sells used utensils which have already been immersed, or utensils that were manufactured in a Jewish factory and are thus exempt from tevilah, must inform purchasers of these facts so they will not recite unnecessary blessings. Conversely, it is also advisable for vendors of utensils that require tevilah to inform purchasers of this fact.

When there is a doubt as to whether or not a utensil should be immersed, a blessing is not recited.

Utensils that do not require a blessing when they are immersed, for example, utensils over whose immersion the recitation of the blessing is a subject of controversy, should be immersed with other utensils that do require a blessing; this should be done with the intention that the blessing discharge the doubtful obligation as well. The blessing should be recited in the plural form and the utensil that definitely requires tevilah should be immersed first. If there is a possibility that the utensil might be used if tevilah is delayed until a utensil that requires a blessing is found, or if it is needed immediately, it may be immersed, but the blessing should be recited without the words Hashem Eloheinu. These words should be borne in mind at the appropriate place in the blessing.

A person who accidentally recited a blessing before immersing a utensil, when the obligation of tevilah was questionable, should still not make any interruption between the blessing and tevilah.

Among those utensils which require tevilah without a blessing are the following:  Utensils in which food is not normally brought to an edible stage – kneading implements, meat grinders, shechita knives, and the like. Also food containers that are not used for preparing food, or for eating or drinking, and are not brought to the table.

The utensil should be held in the right hand during the recitation of the blessing. A left handed person should hold it in their left hand. If one didn’t hold the utensil during the blessing, this is fine. Although the blessing may be recited while sitting, since it’s a birchas ha’nehenin and not a birchas ha’mitzvah , some authorities recommend standing.

A person should concentrate totally on the words he is reciting; certainly, he should not be involved in any other activity.

A naked person may not recite a blessing, even with closed eyes. A blessing may not be recited in the presence of a naked person unless the person reciting it turns away his body and face.

If reciting the blessing in the mikvah room is not possible, perhaps due to some foul odor, The blessing should be recited just outside and then immediately brought into the room and immersed. 

When two people are immersing utensils, it is recommended that one of them recites the blessing. The listener must hear the entire blessing and intend to fulfill his obligation through listening. The reciter must intend to discharge the listener from his obligation. The listener should respond to the blessing with amen, but even if he does not, his obligation is fulfilled. He should not respond baruch hu u’varuch shemo during the blessing. If he does, the blessing should not be repeated unless the reciter continued the blessing while he was responding baruch hu u’varuch shemo. If the reciter’s utensil breaks between the blessing and the immersion, or if he speaks between the blessing and the immersion, the blessing is still valid on behalf of the other person. If the reciter thinks the listener only intends to immerse the utensils in sight, but the listener’s intention is that the blessing include utensils that have not been brought into the mikvah yet, the blessing is still valid for those utensils.

If only one person is immersing utensils, another person should not recite the blessing on his behalf unless the former is a minor (not an adult) who does not know how to recite a blessing.

When a person designates an agent to immerse utensils for him, the agent recites the blessing.

A person who is immersing two utensils – where the blessing is al tevilas keilim – can fulfill the obligation by listening to someone recite al tevilas keili, the blessing for the immersion of one utensil.

One should be careful not to speak even one word between the blessing and tevilah. If one speaks about matters which do not pertain to the tevilah, a new blessing is required.

It is advisable that there be no pause, even a silent one, between the blessing and tevilah, but as long as the person does not become distracted, the blessing is not repeated.

When more than one utensil is being immersed, there should be no interruption between immersions. If one speaks about matters which do not pertain to the tevilah, a new blessing is not required. 

Water must reach all parts of the utensil, inside and out. tevilah is not effective when one part of the utensil is immersed and only then the other part, even if the utensil is so large that it cannot be immersed at one time. Rather it must be totally submerged all at once.

The utensils should be held loosely during tevilah so that the immerser's hand will not create a chatzitza between it and the water. If the immerser wishes to grasp the utensil tightly, he should either change his grasp on it while it is underwater, so the water will reach all parts of the utensil in the process, or place his hand in the water, and then rest the utensil on it. If it is necessary to hold the utensil tightly while it is being immersed in the mikvah, he should moisten his hands with water from the mikvah and hold the utensil tightly with his wet hands.

Utensils may be placed inside a netted sack, basket, or another utensil and then immersed. A number of utensils may be placed in the sack or basket next to one another, but not on top of one another. tevilah of a utensil that is inside another utensil is effective only when the opening of the outer utensil is at least two finger breaths wide (5 centimeters, or 2 inches). If it is smaller, another utensil may be immersed inside it only if the outer utensil also requires tevilah. The requirement to immerse the outer utensil must be greater than or equal to the requirement to immerse the inner utensil. For instance, a metal utensil whose tevilah is required by Torah law, may not be immersed inside a narrow glass utensil, whose tevilah is required by rabbinic law. Immersion in a basket or netted sack is permitted even if the opening at the top is not two fingerbreads. The inner utensil should lie loosely inside the outer utensil. it should not be so heavy as to prevent movement of water between them. It is advisable to shake the utensil or basket while it is underwater so the water passes between them. Alternatively, the larger utensil should be placed in the mikvah, and then the small utensil placed inside it while it is still submerged.

Utensils may be immersed when they are loosely tied together with string or rope. A loose knot should be used even if it is only tied to the handles.

A handle that is attached to a utensil is considered part of that utensil, and it requires tevilah, even if the handle is made from a material that doesn’t require tevilah. If the handle is very long and it will be shortened, it is only required to immerse it up to the point where it will be cut off. Attaching a handle to utensil that has already been immersed does not necessitate a second tevilah.

When part of the utensil that requires tevilah is made from material that does not require tevilah, the whole utensil should be immersed.

It is best to immerse utensils which have detachable parts – such as a meat grinder or thermos – when the utensil is fully assembled in its functional form. If the parts are immersed separately, they should be taken completely apart; this includes every screw which can be unscrewed. Utensils which have substitute parts (different blades of a meat grinder) should be immersed with one part attached then again with another part attached. A utensil may be immersed when it is fully assembled even if some of its parts are made of material that does not require tevilah. If the utensil is immersed when it is disassembled, tevilah is only required for parts made of material that requires tevilah. 

A pocket knife should be immersed opened. If there are a number of blades, it should be immersed with one blade opened and then again with another blade opened, and so on, until all the blades have been immersed.

Utensils which are receptacles, like glasses, maybe immersed sideways or face up. If it is immersed face down, the air pocket may prevent the water from reaching inside the utensil, rendering the tevilah invalid. Utensils with wide openings, like plates or wide, shallow pots, can be immersed face up or down.

Utensils with narrow openings, like bottles, should either be filled with tap water before they are immersed, or left in the mikvah long enough to become filled with water. There are those that say it is a better practice to fill the bottle beforehand than to rely on the cessation of rising air bubbles as proof the bottle is filled.

The minimum amount of water that must cover the utensil during tevilah is enough to enable the utensil to moisten other objects.

It is sufficient to immerse a utensil once.

When immersing the utensil it is proper to have intention to fulfill the mitzvah of tevilas keilim  and to remove the non-Jewish impurity from the utensil. But the immersion is valid even if it was performed without any intention whatsoever.